Tell me what you brought.
You brought 25 or so books?
I collect association copies, books owned by significant figures in early American history and culture.
And not just any book, a book about which I can tell a story, a book that
had some sort of impact, whose reading is recorded in letters or journals or passages or commonplace books.
They run from the 1660s through to the beginning of the Civil War.
What I'm doing here is writing a kind of cultural history of America
disguised as this catalog of my own library.
So it's completely from the artifact up.
I'm telling these stories about individual books and then linking them in a way so that it could be read as a continuous narrative.
So, for instance, let me just sort of give you the beginning and end or some sense of... Can I pop a few shots while we're talking?
Is that going to bother you?
No, no, sure.
Go ahead.
Well, the two or three books that I'm starting with, one is a copy of John Cotton's works, the grandfather of Cotton Mather, the early New England minister who was a friend of Anne Hutchinson's.
And his close friend, John Norton, wrote a biography of him.
It's the first American biography.
It's called Abel, while dead, yet speaketh.
Wow.
Abel, like the biblical character.
While dead, yet speaketh.
There's a real tense problem in there.
And this is one of the books of Cotton's that he used in writing that.
that first American biography in an effort to kind of memorialize cotton.
Along with that, I have a book owned by Simon and Ed Bradstreet.
This is a good example of a kind of book that interests me.
One of her most famous poems is called Upon the Burning of My House.
Her house caught fire in October of 1666, the same year as the Great Fire in London.
And she writes this poem about how she needs to wean her affections from the things of this world, the table and chairs that she used to sit in, all these objects that were meaningful to her, in order to recognize that they were gods and he could take them back at will.
and that the eternal things are awaiting her in heaven.
Meanwhile, however, her husband has a completely different reaction to the fire.
He's lost one of New England's largest libraries, and instead of writing a poem trying to reconcile it with his religious faith and offer himself some sort of Christian comfort, he desperately tries to replace the books that he's lost, which in 1666
Massachusetts is pretty hard to do.
He wants the same books?
He wants the same books.
Has he recorded this sometimes?
Yeah.
Well, he's recorded it in one of my books.
What I have is a book that he bought 10 days after the fire from his son-in-law, who was John Cotton's son.
This is Ann and Simon Bradstreet's daughter, Mary's John Cotton's son, whose name is Seaborne Cotton, born at sea.
And he writes that brought from my brother, Reverend Seaborne Cotton, October 14, 1666.
And this is one of his replacement volumes.
Now that's in here?
Yeah.
He's recorded this in here.
In the book, yeah.
This is annotations.
Yeah, yeah.
Pardon me for interrupting.
No, sure.
Most of what I have are annotated books.
So do we know about this book?
From any other source, or is this basically the only source?
Well, we know about the fire.
We know about her poem about the fire.
But his drive to replicate the library.
Well, no.
This is my inference from the fact that this book is dated 10 days after the fire, and it's a book...
A key book that all ministers and magistrates would have is John Goodwin, Imputatio Fide.
Do you get what you want?
I interrupted.
It's shameful.
No, no, no, that's fine.
I like the conversation.
Do you have a list of some of these books that you have, or will I have to write them all down?
No, I can give you a list.
Because that way... Save it.
It'll be better.
Sure.
That way it'll be accurate.
This is now a 17th century film, isn't it?
Yeah.
So the book itself, and it's also signed by five other generations of Bradstreet's, but this book, 1642, Imputati of Fide, this is...
Here it says, Simon Bradstreet, Brought of My Brother, Mr. Seaborn Cotton.
Hello.
How are you?
Oh, thanks very much.
Very well.
Aren't you kind?
We'll put that way away from the books.
Right here.
I've got it out of the water cooler, so it should be put in the water.
Oh, good.
Thanks.
Look at that.
Brought of My Brother, Mr. Seaborn Cotton, priced for Shelling's November 14, 1660.
66.
So this is right after the fire, and it's clearly a substitute book.
And what happened, probably, and this is my pleasure, kind of reconstructing the circumstances of these books.
The reason Seaborne Cotton would probably have two copies of this book is... I like the hand.
Okay.
is that his father, John Cotton, had died, and he had inherited some of his father's books, and it's likely that he had two copies then.
So this book actually relates in some way to one of the most famous early American poems.
It's the gendered other side of the story.
This doesn't really do it justice, but...
Where did you find that book?
Well, I got it many years ago at Swan's.
It was at an auction.
Yeah.
I mean, sometimes I get them from the family.
I mean, for instance, here's something I got from the family.
If you ask even scholars of early America, who was the first American to translate the Bible, probably nobody could answer you.
A guy named Charles Thompson who was secretary of the Continental Congress and whose name is in print on the Declaration of Independence as the secretary, the recording secretary.
And he served as secretary until Washington's election, so the Constitutional Convention as well through 89.
Then he didn't get a job in Washington's administration.
He fell into something of a depression
And he decided that what he needed to do was devote his life to a translation of the Bible, but not just any translation.
He decided he was going to translate the Septuagint Bible because the Greek Old Testament, the Greek translation from the Hebrew, was probably what Christ himself used.
And so when Christ talks about himself as the fulfillment of various
Old Testament prophecies, you really need access to the Greek Old Testament.
So he got a hold of a 16th century printing of the Greek Old Testament and translated it.
Because in a sense, the New Testament is the spiritual fulfillment of the Old Testament, and America is sort of the historical fulfillment of the Old Testament as a new Israel, etc.,
So it came out, and of course it died.
Who wants to buy anything but the King James?
It's a very weird translation.
It begins, I love this, in the beginning God created heaven and the earth, and the earth was invisible and unfurnished.
The Chippendale furniture hadn't... Whose markings are these?
Well, these are his.
What happened is that...
He decided he was going to do a second edition, and he spent the next 10 years of his life revising.
And these are his unpublished revisions of the first American translation of the Bible.
And some of these notes also make connections between biblical figures and
and American history.
So there's four volumes of this, and this came directly from the family who sold it for a song.
They just had no interest or appreciation of it, but it's this extraordinary document.
So all of these are books about which I can tell stories, the circumstance of the first American translating the Bible, which has something to do with trying to understand why he didn't get a job in Washington's administration.
There must be something wrong with American history, and that means you've got to understand the Bible to get out what's wrong with American history.
Now, if you know this beforehand... Well, it's a combination.
When a book comes up or it's offered to me, I rush to do some research
So I'm always doing some before the fact, but most of it is done after the fact.
But I've got to be convinced there's a story to tell before I buy the book.
And most of these books are bought from quotations.
Quotations, from dealers.
From dealers, descriptions and catalogs.
Well, yeah, though at this point, virtually everybody knows what I collect.
So the bookseller is obviously doing some...
He's doing some research, and I'm building on his research.
And then sometimes people build on my own.
The bookseller is bringing some of the narrative to you.
Yeah, I mean, that's what good booksellers do, is they create value.
They take a $100 book, they beat on it until it's a $1,000 book, and they do that by being able to tell a story about a book.
Why was this important?
Why was it important that this person owned this book?
And in a sense, that's what I'm not doing, not in the surface of being able to enhance the price on it, because I don't sell these books.
This quote will get into my chapter on scholar book science.
Okay.
Sure, sure, fine.
Let me just run through a couple of these, give you a sense of things.
And don't mind my asking questions by a scattershot way.
No, absolutely.
Okay.
You had estimated the collection at about 600 volumes, I think.
Is that about right?
Yeah, it's about 500.
It has three sub-collections in it.
One on Jonathan Edwards, one on Jefferson, and one on Melville.
I have a large number of books.
relating to those three figures and books owned by those three figures.
Does this also reflect your teaching as well?
Yes, all these books I use in my teaching.
I can't teach a book that I don't have physically in front of me.
Because the text of the book or the ideas of the book or the language of the book can be gotten at in a paperback form.
But there's something about knowing what the book looked like.
And...
How do you read cues?
For instance, a certain binding tells you it's addressed to a certain audience or a certain price does that.
There's a certain set of expectations.
You look at booksellers, ads in the book, and you have a sense of the company that book is keeping.
And there's a big difference.
If you have a monument, for instance, I just bought this enormous volume, the largest volume published in America.
in the early colonial period.
Samuel Willard's Complete Body of Divinity weighs about 15 pounds.
It's Jonathan Edwards' copy.
This is a book that is meant to, A, be consulted.
It's not a duodecimer that you carry around.
It implies a certain kind of setting, a library setting.
In a sense, the book is more important than the text.
And what I mean by that is these are 250 sermons that sort of summarize Puritan doctrines.
The book's called The Complete Body of Divinity.
And in a sense, the book is that body.
This enormous book sits there.
And owning it or being a subscriber to it makes you part of a community that subscribes to this doctrine.
And you don't need to reread the whole book to get at the doctrine.
In a sense, all these books are about the presence of the past in the present.
And this is the orthodox divinity from the generation before Edwards.
And his owning it is a kind of paean to it.
It's an acknowledgement of the weightiness of that doctrine.
And it, you know, in a sense, it's a kind of almost
like a double for the body of the author.
This folio kind of protects New England from these various heresies that appear in little pamphlets.
This is sort of the monument, the armor that's used against it.
And it's interesting, in the case of Willard, there's a sort of defensive note in the book that says this is the first folio printed
in New England except law books.
And there's a kind of debate for cultural authority in America in the early 18th century.
Are the lawyers running the show or are the ministers running the show?
And the lawyers have their enormous tones that signify their cultural authority, just the size and bulk of it and the calf as opposed to sheep which is used on
many cheaper New England bindings.
And so now divinity, New England divinity, has its own massive folio to sort of lay against the legal folios.
And it took a number of compositors to put this together.
So there are all kinds of problems in the pagination.
This was beyond the ability of the press at the time.
Is this a scarce book?
Yes, outside of institutions, it's a scarce book.
But because it was highly subscribed to, it had a print run probably of 1,000 copies, which was for 1726 a lot.
And it's a very meaningful book in Edward's career.
This is a key figure that influenced his thinking.
So for me, I'm interested in reading over the shoulder of previous readers.
and understanding what a book means emotionally to somebody, not just intellectually, that Edwards owned this, was proud of it, participates in the book by writing his name.
I mean, margins are there to call forth your markings.
The book has to be brought to life.
It's a dead object until you open it to read it.
And in a sense, the participation of reading extends to the participation of writing in books, whether it's simply Jonathan Edwards, his book, and often it says, as in this case, the gift of, and it's from his brother-in-law.
Many of these operate in a kind of gift culture where one family member gives it to another.
And it's a binding operation.
It creates a sort of drama of risk and positive.
reciprocity.
I've given you this and later you'll give me this.
It becomes a family heirloom as well as locating Edwards in a certain kind of intellectual tradition.
What was the date of that?
1726.
In that sense, let me just talk personally because I project this back on a lot of owners.
Reading a book is one thing.
But owning a book is something different.
I find it comforting.
I find it almost a kind of anxiety reduction, a certain form of self-medication to be in my library, to sort of have this connection with all these previous readers, these famous people, Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Franklin.
I have books from all their libraries.
And reading the actual copy they read,
And even more interesting, looking at the annotations, researching their letters, did they talk about this book when they first acquired it?
And the sense of how it makes you feel about yourself to have this book here.
I mean, a library is a kind of externalized autobiography.
The books are markers of the moment you bought it, the moment you read it, the circumstances, intellectually and emotionally.
And so you revisit moments in your life that are strung together, kind of bead-like, in this library.
So this is a book, Edwards, for example, would have consulted multiple times and would have felt good about, it's almost a political statement, I belong to the party of orthodoxy, is indicated by the fact that I have this book.
And I do it, I'm doing it too, in the way that I...
kind of commune with these books, there's a sense that not only are they alive, because there's a speaking voice that's endlessly conjurable from the physical object, but the experience of reading, at least for me, and I think it's true for most of the people whose books I have, provides a set of terms, a set of situations, categories to interpret your own experience.
that we see the world in part through our previous experience, but we also see it through our previous reading.
And Clinton is like a Shakespearean tragic figure, that we're endlessly understanding our present through these books.
And so they have a kind of a mental existence as a way of making certain things recognizable
because we've seen it not in life, but we've seen it in art.
And just to add to that point, one of the things that I've discovered in reading over the shoulder of all these readers is that often what goes on in reading is not a passive reception of information, but it is a surprising articulation of your own thoughts that you discover what you're really feeling
by reading somebody say something that you say, that's right.
Or we're always reading certain passages more intensely than others because our immediate emotional situation gives us a kind of intense privilege access to something where suddenly we understand it because we're sort of feeling the same way.
Let me give you one example from my own life.
I had to teach Tender is the Night for a college.
I usually teach 18th and 19th century, not 20th.
I had to teach Tender is the Night on a quick basis.
The guy couldn't make the class up.
So I dug up my college copy of Tender is the Night to reread it.
And there I hid a passage about Dick Diver, the psychiatrist.
It's a quite negative passage about him.
And next to it, in the handwriting,
of my college girlfriend are the letters JWF.
My initials.
So here, 20 years later, she's reading this while she's angry at me and while we're breaking up.
And so she's deeply occupied with the book.
She's reading it, but she's also deeply preoccupied by what's going on in her life.
And suddenly this passage...
becomes about me and not about Dick Diver, and she marks it that way.
Do you think of the expectation that you... No, no, of course not.
But 25 years later, I'm witnessing this, I'm seeing her anger on the page as she's yoking her life and the book's text together.
Go ahead.
Yeah, and affixing my name.
What makes you so sure that she was identifying you with Diver?
Well, I still have this book.
The paragraph is about, there's a paragraph that's marked.
She's marked off the paragraph and said, J.W.S.
This is you.
Yeah, but no, this is me.
Unflattering, I gather.
Yeah, completely unflattering.
He basically marries his patient.
He controls her.
She was younger, etc.
And it's that sort of, it's so that in reading you're learning about what you feel at the moment, not just about the reading.
It's that kind of extraordinary shock of recognition and articulation.
So some of these books are, for example, if you take this extraordinary book, this is Jefferson's copy of Paradise Lost.
Jefferson didn't mark his books up.
John Adams did.
For instance, John Adams, there are some books of John Adams with six or seven thousand words of annotations in a single book.
Because for him, reading is a conversation with the author, and if he disagrees, he's got to tell the author immediately, this is Adams.
And I have one annotated book from his library where he's, in a sense, intimidated by the learning of the author
who is using all these Greek words, and Adams, who knew Greek, responds by annotating it in Greek in this kind of tit-for-tat.
But what Jefferson did, in contrast, is he kept a commonplace book in which he transcribed passages from his reading.
And in his literary commonplace book, a large number of the early passages are copied from this very book, and they're mostly about Satan
How come this didn't go on to the University of Virginia or the Library of Congress or some sort of place?
I have to ask it because I'll forget it.
In the winter of 1784, Madison, who was sort of deciding what he was going to do with his life, spent the winter reading books from Jefferson's library that would be taken down from Monticello to Montpelier
by the minister whose parish, whose Anglican parish separated the two.
This ended up in the parish, in the minister's own library, never having returned to Jefferson ultimately.
Well, it did, then it went... Anyway, it ended up in the minister's library.
He didn't return it.
He kept it like what happens all the time.
He kept it.
And Madison...
when he was reading it was the time Jefferson was leaving to go to Paris as a minister.
This is also passed through Madison's hands.
This is the only known book signed by both Jefferson and Madison.
Jefferson almost never signed his books.
He used this initial encoder, which you probably assume.
But there are about 1,000-plus books in the Library of Congress and in Aldermen and elsewhere.
There are about only five that exist that have signatures.
One of the sort of research projects for me was to why do these five have signatures, and all the others have initials.
They all have one thing in common, and that's this.
That's Jefferson's signature.
On the title page.
Paradise Lost was constantly invoked during the American Revolution, because there was an analogy between the war and heaven.
But you'll notice, if you look carefully here, that this is James Madison's signature, which he has tried to erase.
This is also on the title page.
Right.
Here's Madison.
writing his name three times.
His pen is running out of ink.
Where are we now?
On the back of the title page.
So basically what happened was Jefferson lent this to Madison.
Madison, since Jefferson was away for four years, decided to write his name in it.
Jefferson got it back at some point and tried to erase his name.
And this is what all these books have in common.
A failed erasure on the title page.
In other words, once somebody else had defaced the book, and he failed to completely get rid of it, that sort of forced his hand.
And he then had to acknowledge his name on this, left somebody... But all these other books have this in common?
You've examined them?
Well, I haven't examined them, but I told about them.
Well, two others are signed by his father.
and both their signatures are, and they're both relatively new, I mean relatively old.
This is 1751.
Jefferson lived with his four sisters and his mother.
His father had died when he was relatively young, and to some degree his library is a kind of father figure.
But he began to dislike women.
Jefferson?
Yeah, living with all these women.
One of the earliest things he... I'm just looking.
Yeah, sure.
One of the earliest things he copies out into his commonplace books are all these passages about how Eve has brought... But he didn't get these, did he?
He didn't try to... No, he didn't try to... Go ahead, I'm listening.
Eve has brought evil into the world.
All these misogynist passages out of Milton appearing his late teens in his commonplace book.
And then later, he keys to Satan as a kind of romantic hero, much as Blake would do, that the real hero is Satan.
So the passages he quotes in his commonplace book are things like Satan saying, I'd rather rule in hell than be subservient in heaven.
Suddenly, Satan becomes a revolutionary.
So the book, in fact, in common sense, Paine's common sense, the only authority
The only person quoted, because Paine didn't like to use authorities.
He wanted to make the case his argument was self-evident.
Why need all these old authorities?
But he quotes from Paradise Lost.
He doesn't tell his reader that he's actually quoting Satan, who says, we are beyond reconcilement.
So Jefferson, over about a 20-year period, he owned a number of copies of Paradise Lost, but this matches exactly the...
lineation, the capitalization, the punctuation.
In the 18th century, different editions of Milton differed widely on matters of punctuation and lineation.
I've checked this against his entries, and this is the copy.
For him, this is a way of understanding and expressing his feelings.
He's not so much interested in what Milton says, but what does what Milton say allow me to say by surrogating
rather than saying... But now you're talking about this process allows you to more or less lean over the shoulder of the reader.
Yeah.
That almost implies that you need annotations, doesn't it?
Well... And here you don't.
You really have any.
You have a commonplace book which will help you... Well, we have a commonplace book where passages are taken out of this book.
Or at least out of this edition.
This is the only edition that's signed by him.
So this is the... Yeah, you... Well, sometimes...
For you to tell me what you just told me, there has to be some other record, doesn't there?
Yes and no.
Sometimes I can pull it out of thin air.
Here's a work of Defoe's.
Just describe from my tape recorder the size of the book.
This is a small folio, jure divino, a satire.
written by... J-U-R-E-D-I-V-I-N-O.
Right.
A satire, S-A-T-Y-R.
Yeah, the old spelling.
London 1706.
Well, the earliest play written in America that was produced in America was a political satire called Androboros after Governor Andros.
And it was written by a guy named Robert Hunter.
And it was based
on the satires of Defoe.
This is Hunter's signature that I've authenticated against known signatures.
It's at the back of the book.
I know from the play, the text of the play, that he is drawing on Defoe.
Yes, there it's triangulated by the existence of something he wrote.
This is a book that was actually used in the writing
of the first American play, or to give you something even more extraordinary, sometimes you own a book in order to hate the book.
The Peter Zenger trial, his lawyer was Andrew Hamilton, not to be confused with Alexander Hamilton.
In Andrew Hamilton's defense,
was that even though all the law books say that truth is not a defense against libel, he's arguing it is.
The truth is a defense against libel.
No, it's not a defense.
It's one who's constantly concerned about these matters.
Hamilton is the first guy to make the argument.
The previous argument had been, even if it's true, it still demeans and compromises the authority of people in power, whether it's magistrates or ministers.
So it doesn't matter if it's true.
It is not for you to use a public forum to say things that blaspheme authorities.
And the essence of Hamilton's defense is
Not only do we know that this governor is guilty of all these things, we see the corruption all around us, but truth should be a defense.
And in this case, it's a self-evidentry.
And the book that he used at the trial...
Condition is irrelevant.
Condition is completely.
In fact, the more read, if it's read to death, that's what I love.
I'm interested in books that, when Jefferson says, for example, how can I live without books, or whatever that quote is, I can't live without books, what does that really mean?
What's the emotional payoff?
Endlessly, I see letters of early Americans saying, this book was my boon companion,
My Best Friend," or I have a book owned by Catherine Sedgwick, the early American novelist, who says, this book has seen me through the 40 years of the vicissitudes of life.
So the book becomes an important relationship, as important as the relationship with a family member.
There's a kind of physical intimacy she carries it around with her.
And instead of talking to people, or in addition to talking to people, when she's upset, she turns to the Psalms.
This is her life companion.
So the book becomes a sort of person in her life.
Anyway, Hamilton here, that's Alexander Hamilton.
I'm sorry, Andrew Hamilton, who's also signed it here.
This book, Instructor Clara Callis, was sort of the basic law book that all these early American lawyers had.
And it deals with slander, among other things.
And it gives the standard line that truth is not a defense against the accusation of slander.
And one of the really radical things that Hamilton does is to say, it doesn't matter what precedent says.
It doesn't matter what the weight of all this past common law
and so he dismisses the books in favor of common sense, because a lot of these books come from a worldview in which the past has a wisdom that needs to be transmitted to the present, and it's crucial to have these books as transmitters.
You don't reinvent the world's wisdom every generation.
This is a very largely backward-looking, reverential, filiopietistic culture, and... Filio-what?
Filiopietistic, the piety of the
The Son's Piety for the Fathers.
F-I-L-E-O, right?
It's F-I-L-E-O-I-O, I mean.
It's a word, right?
Yeah, yeah.
It's a word.
So paradoxically, this is a book that he is arguing against and a book that he almost... he had to have consulted because this is the standard...
book in which the definition of the slander law is... So when you come to write your essay about this book... It allows me to tell... The subtext is going to be the Zenger trial.
Absolutely.
Because I'm looking at books as witnesses, as historical witnesses to particular moments, sometimes very powerful moments.
For instance, while the Louisiana Purchase was being negotiated by a guy named Robert Livingston for Jefferson,
a French philosopher by the name of Volney came to his door.
V-O-L-N-E-Y.
Volney had written a very famous book a decade earlier called The Ruins of Empires, that nations should not become so proud because history is not progressive and linear, it's cyclical.
And as America doubles its size on the eve of its sort of becoming an empire, he gives this to Livingston as a sort of cautionary
text for America to beware.
And so that book marks a specific moment in the negotiation to the Louisiana Purchase where it's offered as a kind of warning and it survives today.
Is this a collection in your view?
Oh, absolutely.
There are
Yeah.
And you're... I mean, it is, but do you see it as a collection?
Oh, absolutely.
Yes.
Well, what only do I see... I'm trying to establish motivation here.
I wake up sometimes in the middle of the night and will go to my library and move a book from one shelf to another because in the middle of the night I thought about certain connections between the two, that this author and this author or something, and I want the moments to commune with one another.
Physically.
Physically, yeah.
What...
becomes visible when you bring these two things together that's not visible when they're kept apart.
Give me an example of what you might be talking about here.
Sure.
Just think of something that might be appropriate that would make a pretty good example.
Well, alright.
Take this book.
When we think of the Puritans, we think of people who are
that it's a Bible culture.
But Puritans in the 17th century also believed in astrology, which runs counter to the notion of providence, that it mattered what star you were born under and whether this was in ascent or this was in descent.
And the almanacs of the period are full of these sorts of things.
And so in this book, this book is called Christian Astrology.
It's an effort to reconcile these two worlds.
And Christian astrology, erecting a scheme of heaven, nature of the twelve signs, and a methodical way instructeth the student how to judge or resolve all manner of questions contingent unto man.
Basically how to read your, it's almost like palm reading, how to read your future based on your sign.
But then it even goes further.
The third contains an exact method whereby to judge upon nativity, several ways how to rectify them.
You're born under a bad sign, but wait.
There are ways you might use to rectify them.
1647.
Well, this book was owned by Edward Holyoke, who later became president of Harvard.
This, by the way, is a 1704 American book plate.
You don't find it much earlier than that.
And Holyoke issued a series of almanacs.
and his almanacs draw on this book.
And he learns how to make almanacs, and it's annotated by him.
It's a wrote, apparently.
Look at that.
Extensive, heavily annotated.
Well, and not only that, if you look at this page, this chapter of the book tells you how to do what's called an ephemeris.
The lunar, you know, the tides and the moons and the setting of the sun, all these mathematical formulas.
This is his manuscript, Ephemeris, that he used in the preparation of his 1709 almanac.
So this astrology book was used by an early American almanac maker who took for granted what we would call now the magical thinking of astrology.
And if you set this book, it's a 1640s book, against something like Willard's,
complete body of divinity.
Then you've got this sense of what David calls that the Puritans were also sort of wayward Elizabethans who were full of these Elizabethan superstitions.
So for me, this is sort of the secret world of the Puritans.
This is not theology.
And in a sense, it compensates for what theology can't offer you.
If God has made a decision, a predestination, about your eternal afterlife and there's nothing you can do about it, well, then astrology becomes pretty attractive because astrology offers some ways to deal with it.
How do you translate the Latin in the book, please?
It's...
The jury is speaking.
This is something like hold me to my speech or something.
No, no, no.
This, by the way, is in a 1704 binding.
We know that because we can match the ornaments, the printer's ornaments.
And you notice that that sheet was tipped, it's bound in.
So the book, here's Holyoke's signature in six, the book was rebound.
It's a 1647 book, so it couldn't have had that in it.
It was rebound when he bought it, about 1706, and the ornaments match a binder's ornaments.
in Boston at that period.
Is this the research you've done or the books that you did?
No, I did, yeah.
So you spend a lot of time on these individual books.
Well, maybe I haven't made it clear, that's why I'm here.
I'm writing a book about my library where all these stories are told, and it's intended to be a kind of artifactual tour of American cultural and intellectual history.
But in every case, it's tied to a specific book, specific signatures, annotations, inscriptions, sometimes deeply moving inscriptions.
But you know, you've got this book to tell me how you would have gotten up on the night and put it someplace else.
Well, I would have put it next to, say, The Willard Complete Body of Divinity.
Because, in a sense, this is the secret world of the Puritans, and the other is the official world.
And it would be nice to confront... So it would have gone with... What book would you... Well, the Edwards book that I just described.
When I talk about historical witness, take a book like John Adams' Defense of the Constitutions.
This is a defense of the state constitutions.
that came out in 87 in Philadelphia in order to influence the debates over the federal constitution.
The debate again is what?
87.
I just want to see the book play.
This isn't the one from the Old South Church.
No, this is Talleyrand's book play.
Oh, okay.
And this he used, and he talks about using it in the writing of the French Constitution of 1790.
Talleyrand talks about it?
Yeah.
Talleyrand used this.
So we have multiple associations here.
Yeah.
He bought it from this bookstore in Paris, Barbois.
They were also a printer.
They printed the French edition of Jefferson's Notes on the State of Virginia.
This is a book about American Constitution writing, used in the writing of the French Constitution.
Where did you get that book?
I'm a dealer.
I don't have a mark on it.
Are you spending a lot of money for these books?
Well, no.
Whenever I can, because I've collected for 30 years, the books I have appreciated significantly so that I can trade a book that I bought at X amount of money for a book that now is three times X.
I'm very, just sort of off the record, I'm very anxious about IRS because I do, and every serious collector does, deals in books, sells books in order to buy new books.
So I'm involved in that, but no dealer can really go on the record as doing that because it's sort of an underground economy.
I use, my books are my bank account, and I use them, I spend them to get what I see to be even more compelling books.
Well, so even if it's a very... Well, I try not to sell association or trade association copies.
So I'm always nibbling up.
So these books aren't forever then?
Well, no, there are books that will, you know,
The books I'm showing you will never leave.
There are some that are marginal in those 500 books.
I had to sell 23 books to buy the Jonathan Edwards copy of Willard, but it was so extraordinary.
It is a self-sustaining collection.
Yeah, it feeds on itself, but in order to become even more extraordinary.
Now, do you have a name for your collection?
Well, for the purposes of the... I thought I cataloged.
You have a catalog.
Yeah, well, it's out of date, but I do have a catalog.
Is this something that I can use for a copy of this?
Yeah, I can give you a copy.
Pretty quickly, too?
Yeah, I can give it to you today.
Do you have a...
CV that I can have, too, and I have to go through all the whole background of your... Well, when we go, I can print it out at home.
I don't have it.
But let me tell you two other kinds of books that I have.
Sometimes, very rarely, I'm interested in an anonymous owner.
But the anonymous owner has to be really extraordinary.
You're probably familiar with Mary Rowlandson's captivity narrative.
It came out in 1675.
The book was reprinted over and over again.
This is a copy from 1794.
This is a copy of an account by a woman of being captured by the Indians.
What's extraordinary about it is the binding.
The binding.
The binding, from all the research I've done, is a hand-painted mohawk binding.
In other words, this was owned by a Native American at the end of the 18th or the beginning of the 19th century.
Now, where would a Native American get this?
And tell me this, how do you describe the size of this?
This, it's a duodecimal.
Um... I...
I've identified this pattern as a Mohawk pattern, and I've got people working here now, people who deal with early Native American arts, to see if there's a text here.
In other words, this is merely decorative, or does it make some kind of statement?
What probably happened is that this was a Native American who was in what's called a praying Indian in a Christian mission, who was being taught to read
by the use of these relatively simple small books.
But imagine the situation of the Indian who is being taught to, in a sense, see his own culture as evil.
And it alienates him from his cultural world in order to bring him into the world of Christianity.
And in a sense, he's taking his world back by marking it as a Native American artifact.
So there the reading situation that I'm imagining is very powerful.
What's going through the mind of a Native American who's being taught to read English with this account of the brutality of Native Americans?
Or in this case, this is something I'm working on right now.
The O.J.
Simpson trial of the 19th century was the... Do that again.
Simpson trial of the 19th century was this trial of John Webster for the murder of George Parkman.
They were both at Harvard.
Webster owed money to Parkman.
Eventually, Parkman's body was found in
in the refuge of a furnace.
I'm sorry, the author of the George Who, what's his name?
Bemis, B-E-M-I-S.
B-E-M-I-S.
Okay.
So anyway, this exposed Harvard to the kind of publicity they didn't want.
One Harvard professor killing this other Harvard researcher.
It was this massive trial that went on for months, and finally Webster was convicted, even though he said the janitor did it.
The janitor was making the money on the side by supplying bodies for anatomy classes.
When was this?
The murder was November 1849, in the trial 1850.
The main witness...
was the chief medical officer who identified these bones as being partners, which was pretty hard to do, right?
In 1850.
Well, what this is... So anyway, let me just give you one more setup before I open the book.
So the guy's hanged, and there's this... He's hanged.
Yeah, he's hanged.
There's this outcry that not only has the verdict against this Harvard professor been excessive,
but that the defense really didn't make much of a case in the prosecution over-prosecuted.
Most people didn't, many, many people didn't believe he did it.
Well, this copy is owned by Winslow Lewis.
This is the official account that the prosecutor wrote, basically defending his case.
Bemis was the prosecutor.
And this is...
Webster, the murderer.
That's him.
And this is Parkman, the murderer.
And what this book is, is a copy of the official transcript of the trial owned by the chief medical officer, Winslow Lewis.
And Winslow Lewis has not only gotten everybody in the trial to sign a piece of paper, including
Ephraim Littlefield, who was the janitor who might have done it.
But the murder took place between 1 and 5 p.m.
on Friday, the 23rd of November, 1849.
And what is pasted onto the front here is a, this is an appointment slip in Webster's hand.
It matches the signature in there and matches all these signatures I've looked at.
for an appointment at about half past three on the day of the murder, when the murder was known to take place between one and five.
He's trying to set up his alibi here.
Well, this was never introduced in the case, that this is a potentially exculpatory piece of evidence that never made it into trial, but appears in the chief medical officer's copy, who has almost sort of pasted it as a kind of trophy.
And it's unknown to scholars...
Yeah.
Simon Shaman, Harvard, has written a book about this murder case.
Has he?
Yeah, called Dead Certains.
Oh, I know that book.
I haven't read it, but I know the book.
That's about this murder case, and he's never seen this.
So this is potentially a volatile piece of information.
And there's now another book being written by a woman.
I'm meeting her in Boston on Saturdays.
Because this book not only has that, but it has the medical officer's annotations about the trial.
This is quite a significant artifact.
Yeah, this might open up the most important... Do you think Shama has it right or wrong?
I don't mean that for you to... This is a book you certainly should have known.
Well, this was in...
This was not in a public repository.
I just got this book, and it's unknown.
But what I'm saying is, there's no way you knew he was writing about the trial either, but I should think it would have been something.
Oh, yeah, he would have loved to have seen, of course.
It's too late for his book.
So each of these books has some sort of, stands as a kind of witness to
to something or it sheds light.
So, let me just finish on that.
Are you able to draw any conclusions based on this?
Well, it's more intriguing than it is utterly convincing.
I'm going to talk to this woman who's now writing a new book.
She knows a lot more than I do.
The actual transcript of the trial is at Mass Historical Society, so I will use their
material and see if this new piece of evidence.
So I see myself as sort of rescuing these books and bringing them together into a whole that I'll probably leave to Stanford University that represents books from really the libraries of most significant Americans, from
the 1650s to the 1850s, and all of them books that I will tell stories about, stories that are, as you say, triangulated by external evidence of letters or diary entries or annotations in the book.
For instance, this is a book from Melville's library, an important book, a book of 18th century philosophy in the 19th century of Bridgman.
And this is a gift book.
Richard Lathers was a friend of his.
He was a southerner.
L-A-T-H-E-R-S.
And Lathers sold his slaves, moved to Long Island, set up this enormous mansion in Long Island with a large library that Melville used to visit.
Can I describe from Lathers to Melville?
No, no, from Melville to Lathers.
All right, no.
So Melville gave this to Lavin.
Right.
This is Melville's signature.
That's quite wonderful, isn't it?
Melville... 1853.
In 1853... Moby Dick is only a year or so old.
Well, but the problem is that Pierre had bombed.
Nobody's reading Moby Dick?
Nobody's reading Moby Dick, so he decides he's going to write magazine fiction.
of Benito Serino and Bartleby, et cetera, all began to be written at this point.
And Lathers had given him a copy of Washington Irving's stories to encourage him to do magazine work, to be paid by the page for piece work.
And this was the reciprocating gift.
I just want to write down the description.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
Let's just go to that description.
You can keep talking.
All right, so Richard Lathers, Esquire from his friend Herman Melville.
But Melville had read this book before he gave it to Lathers, and it has some of his marginalia in Melville's hand.
And what's interesting is that the marginalia... This is Melville's hand right here.
It's quite different from this or this.
Melville... Is this pencil for you?
Yeah, that's pencil, yeah.
This is pencil.
Two previous people had read this book before Melville bought it.
He bought it as a used book.
And here, the passage here is about Stern, Lauren Stern, you know, the sentimental journey, Tristram Shandy.
And it says, Stern, to acknowledge with Stern as the truest philosophy that there is not so much difference between good and evil.
You're reading from the text.
From the text.
as the world are apt to imagine.
This is sort of a position you might think Melville would be attracted to, who obviously sees good and evil as not exactly opposite one another.
But an early reader had said, a very unphilosophical critic, certainly.
In other words, this reader is disagreeing with Stern's too easy formulation, that good and evil are closer...
And then Melville, responding to the previous person's marginalia, says, yes, slightly asinine.
What's he saying up here, right next to the book?
Well, this is not Melville.
This is a previous owner, and you can see that it was rebound subsequently to that.
So this is a book about whether or not the world is beneficent and whether it's made for man's benefit.
It's a podcast.
It's a popular book, Seeing God as Benevolent, and Nature as Being His Revelation.
And this is precisely the sort of philosophy that Melville wanted to embrace but couldn't intellectually.
And it's interesting that he chose to give this as a gift, because in Pierre, the novel he had just finished before reading this book, the main character is given a copy of this book.
Really?
This very same book.
So you save the kicker for the last.
And refuses to accept it because he's given up on these sort of sophomoric views of God's goodness.
And so it's a very powerful book.
It's almost as if Melville is giving it from his library, not because he subscribes to it so much as he's trying to distance himself from it, get away from the book.
So it gives me the occasion to speculate on Melville's motives for giving it, look at his annotations.
This book is just a great treasure at that key period in his history.
And so here at AAS?
What am I doing here?
Well, I'm looking at other annotated and inscribed books, sometimes by the same people, because sometimes it matters the form of the inscriptions.
For instance, I'm a book by Margaret Fuller, the early feminist.
She had two loves in her life.
One was a woman, Anna Barker, and one was a man, Sam Ward.
She waxes rhapsodic about these two.
She's crazy about Emerson, too.
What?
Wasn't she crazy about Emerson, too?
Well, yeah, though he kept her at a great distance.
But she had these big fantasy lives about these two.
She was self-conscious that her letters would be read as excessively sensual, but when she talks about Anna Barker, it's incredible.
She says, this electricity moves through my body whenever I'm next to her, et cetera, et cetera.
Well, then the horrible day of her life comes.
Anna Barker, one love, and this sexy son of a Boston banker, Sam Ward, marry each other.
So, poor Mother Fuller.
Anyway, she then goes on and writes a book, and she feels she has to give a copy to Sam and Anna.
But she does it, she only initials it, even though she's very close to both of them.
It's as if she doesn't want to, you know, this is a traumatic connection.
So she makes herself disappear into her initials.
She's there but not there.
Was this, you think, a carnal relationship with both?
No, I think it was a psychological relationship with both, but it had a physical impact on her in the way that reading...
you know, erotic literature.
You don't need to have the physical body there.
But there are other books that I've seen to friends who are much less close in which she calls herself Sarah.
But here it's the S. It's Sarah Margaret Fuller is her full name.
So you can, for me, this is kind of the quintessential example where
I'm trying to feel what she's feeling at the moment that she's giving this book in these charged circumstances.
The book I end with, at the end of this book that I'm writing, well... So you're pretty well along then, aren't you?
Well, somewhat.
I've been collecting, so the stories exist.
I can't get away without showing you what most people consider the best book in my collection.
Let me show them to you first.
Let me tell you the story of this.
Frederick Douglass escapes from the Baltimore docks.
He becomes involved in the abolitionist cause, but he has a problem.
And his problem is that whenever it's announced that he's speaking somewhere, he's susceptible to recapture under the fugitive slave law.
And he's married, and he's worried about his wife as well as himself.
So he has a certain number of options.
One option is to purchase his legal freedom, because there was a price on his head.
Purchase his manumission.
But people like Garrison said to him, well, if you do that, you're conceiving the philosophical principle of ownership.
Easy for Garrison.
Right, exactly.
The philosophical principle of ownership of human property.
Well, but Douglas had a great comeback.
He said, well, that's your metaphor.
My metaphor...
is that slavery is a form of kidnapping and I'd be paying a ransom, which is quite different than purchasing myself as a commodity.
But what he does to escape the jeopardy of the fugitive slave law is to go on a speaking tour in Ireland and England.
And he gets to Newcastle upon Tyne, a small Quaker meeting room.
And there's a woman there, Ellen Richardson, who's about 28 years old, which is sort of an old maid for the time.
And she'd never seen anybody like this.
This charismatic, extraordinarily handsome black man telling the story of his life and telling the story of his jeopardy under the fugitive slave law.
So she walks up to him and says, well, you know, I could purchase your freedom for you.
I'd raise the money.
My brother, as a male, would do the correspondence to your slave owner.
She, in fact, purchases his legal freedom.
This was her way of getting herself into his life.
In fact, they have a lifelong correspondence.
Her name once again?
Ellen Richardson.
There are people who think he had an affair with her.
The tour was occasioned by the first volume of his autobiography, Mary of My Life as a Slave.
But then he rewrote his, in a much longer form, in 1855, his autobiography called My Bondage, My Freedom.
And it's a sort of ironic title because the freedom isn't much different from the bond either.
And one of the centerpieces of this is his account of meeting Ellen Richardson and her purchasing his freedom.
That's 55.
59, he's indicted as a co-conspirator with John Brown, with whom he had some connection, but he was not part of this conspiracy, you know, the Harper's Ferry.
But now he has to flee from the North.
He flees to Canada.
His marriage has fallen apart.
He has relatively little money.
He's pretty confident that Lincoln is going to lose the election of 1860.
Where to go?
He decides to go across the Atlantic and see Ellen Richardson again
And with him, he was going to take across the Atlantic, or did take with him across the My Bondage, My Freedom, which tells about her purchasing his freedom with this inscription.
So why don't you read it for me?
To Miss Ellen Richardson.
Do it slowly, okay.
Ellen Richardson, underline twice.
Underline twice, with the respect... Comma.
esteem and most grateful regards of the author.
Author's underline.
Underline, which connects them.
They both have the double underlining.
And it's in the third person because of the pride of his authorship as a black author and as a token of his sentiments toward her as the friend and benefactress through whose active benevolence he was, the key verb, ransomed from American slavery.
Wow.
Jesus Christ.
Let me hold this one.
That's a hot book.
And where did you go?
Well, this is an amazing story.
Each of these books has a story.
Yeah, I mean, wow, a hand, fist.
But take a look at this.
This knocks me out.
Well, but I got another volume that goes with it.
When they first went to hear him speak in 1846, this is the copy of the first
version of his autobiography this is the mother Sarah Richardson and here this is this they actually had with them it was a Dublin edition when they heard him speak this is the first version of the autobiography narrative of the life of Frederick Douglass an American slave written by himself Dublin 1846 came out in 1845 yeah and then this is when they meet
And she proposes that she purchase his freedom.
She does.
This is the account of it, and this is what he brings back with her.
She's given him his life in law.
He gives her his life in letters.
And she has signed her name.
Well, this is the mother.
The mother and daughter came to hear them.
The mother, actually, and two sisters.
And this is what they brought when they first went.
So these were both in the family.
And the Richardson family.
And you acquired them from the Richardson family?
No, it's unbelievable.
Somehow they ended up, you know, you hear these stories about Paris bookstalls all the time, but they ended up in a Paris bookstall and they were purchased in the 1930s by a professor at the University of Paris who was a communist and identified with Douglas.
And he sent it to an American friend of his with an inscription saying, in memory of an earlier leftist movement or something like that.
And this friend not only really didn't know who, he sort of knew who Frederick Douglass was, but he hadn't even noticed that this was signed and he had no idea what the story was.
So I'm at this guy's house for dinner and I see this 19th century American binding, mid-19th century.
It just blows me away.
I can't believe what I'm seeing.
So, stupidly, I tell them the whole story that I just told you.
This is, of course, the last thing I should have done.
And I'm a young assistant professor.
I'm making like $16,000 a year.
What is this?
1978 or not.
How old are you, by the way?
I'm 49.
And so I offer them $1,000.
which, of course, I didn't have, but I'd get $1,000 for it.
He said, no, I can't sell it.
So I said, can I borrow it?
Because I teach Frederick Douglass all the time, and this blows students away.
Well, again, it's the presence of the past.
It's right there in the hand.
Beginning in about the 1830s, when facsimile signatures could be easily reproduced.
They didn't have to be done on woodcuts.
This notion that the signature was revelatory of the personality created this vogue of collecting signatures.
You take a Washington letter, you cut the signature off, throw the letter away because there was something powerful about the signature.
The signature in some way was the man.
Paul has a series of essays on the signatures of famous men.
which he reproduces the signature in facsimile and then describes it.
So there's something still about seeing signatures as a sort of double for the person.
Anyway, so for years I borrowed this book.
I finally... And where was this?
This was a retired Stanford professor.
So you were out in California?
Yes, in Palo Alto, California.
So...
So he's an older guy.
I'm like 31 at the time.
He's like 60.
You're desperate for this.
I can't sleep at night.
I can't sleep at night to know that this is out there and that I alone know that it's out there and that this guy doesn't care about it except that he now knows it's valuable.
So what happens is three years later
He dies.
He gets divorced.
And then I said, oh, I'm not going to miss it.
I miss this opportunity.
What if she takes the guy?
Well, you know, it's important to us, but the wider world is not always moved by Frederick Douglass, or even knows who the hell he is.
So I come in for the kill, and I offer $3,000.
And he sells it to me.
And off the record, because I don't want to talk about prices, I just turned down $110.
Well, that was a dealer.
I won't use prices, by the way.
Don't worry about it.
That's not of great interest to me.
People want to tell me I'm interested in knowing.
I want to know if you can afford to collect.
That's what I'm interested in.
Finish the story.
So I got the book from him.
And this was in the 70s?
Yeah.
Maybe 81 or so.
Yeah, late 70s, yeah.
He's still alive, this guy?
Believe it or not, is.
Does he ever mention this?
He's been retired so long, I haven't seen him in years.
And we don't really know how... Oh, he got it from... He got it.
So we don't know what happened to the book between 1855 and 1930.
Thank God it didn't...
disappear.
Yeah, easily.
Well, that's what I see myself as, you know, these survivals that I'm trying to document and keep together and ultimately bring together for a library that have all kinds of intellectual relationships to one another.
I'll have a book from Melville's library and then a copy of a Melville book.
Let me tell you about this Hawthorne book that I just got.
I'll give you one in the store before we do it.
I'm just keeping very fast.
No, go ahead.
I just picked up an extraordinary book, The House of Seven Gagels, 1851, the same year as Moby-Day.
Hawthorne's writing about old Salem, and he's haunted by old Salem.
There's a sense, by the way, of these books as all kind of being haunted and haunting.
They're so powerful, they're haunting.
They internalize themselves in some way.
Pardon me for sharing your enthusiasm.
It's the same kind of... Yeah, well, we are.
I go berserk myself.
Well, that really blows me.
Well, there's nothing like that out there.
Well, I'll tell you another.
I want to tell you this often, but I'll tell you another story that's even... So I thought, you know, here's this Jewish guy in golf.
I shouldn't own this book.
I'm beginning to feel guilty about owning this book.
You're feeling guilty about owning this book?
Yeah, about this book.
Well, Charles Waxing would kill that.
Well, no, but I said where the book really should be is Howard University.
So I'm torn.
Whether I should keep it or I should... Is that where Douglass' stuff is?
Well, suffice it to say that the library is the Frederick Douglass Library.
So I take it in there.
because I'm having this real kind of crisis of conscience which I got over but I'm thinking either I'll sell it or give it to him so I show it to the special collections guy there and of course he almost drops dead and before I open my mouth he says we can't afford this but here's the name of
somebody on our board of trustees who might be able to afford it.
He didn't have no money.
He thought you were trying to just sell it for money.
Yeah, but I went in... In other words, this guy might be able to buy it for himself.
Or buy it for us.
But I wanted to talk to him about the book, and they've got the stock list stuff there.
But of course, he wanted to buy it.
He misread me.
Yeah, he misread me.
Because I was thinking of giving it to him.
But then, here's the extraordinary moment.
So I got these two books in my book bag.
Did you get both of these?
Yeah, they're together.
Somebody put them together.
Yeah, well, the family.
Well, and they're volume one and volume two.
This is the expanded version of this.
So I'm leaving special collections, and they've got a security desk with this black undergraduate guy manning the desk.
And here I am.
I got my little corduroy suit on.
And I'm all ready to open this.
And I'm already thinking, what am I going to tell the guy?
Because it looks like it's something they should have.
I'm getting nervous about having to explain it as I leave.
And I'm with another faculty member.
He looks at us.
He sees that we've got ties and jackets on.
And he lowers his eyes and waves us without even looking into the back.
Mistakes.
Well, but this was the first time I'd really seen that sort of Southern black deference to white culture, where he would be nervous examining the bags of white professionals.
I don't see that at Whitener.
Well, you know, you don't see it at Whitener.
They check all my Xerox copies regarding it, as well they should.
I'm glad they do.
I'm going to tell you one last story, and we'll go.
This is the sort of book I am with.
This is a real beat-up book.
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., who became the Supreme Court Justice, lived in the shadow of his famous father, Oliver Wendell Holmes.
You just keep talking.
I'm going to go in here and take some pictures.
You want to take some water before I move that glass?
So, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.,
And one of his friends is Emerson's son.
They have in common the fact that they have these famous parents.
So Oliver Wendell Holmes goes to fight in the Civil War, and he's wounded.
He's in a military hospital.
And Edward Emerson brings him a copy of The Conduct of Life, one of his father's books, as a kind of text of Christian consolation or non-Christian consolation.
And he hands it around to the other wounded soldiers, and they're reading it.
And this is the copy that he had in the hospital.
And what moves me about it is there are collectors whose fantasy is the pristine copy, exactly as it came out from the presses.
And that's why condition matters so much.
For me, it's the opposite.
A book like this that's battered to death, in a sense, emotionally, I connect it with the wounded body of Holmes.
This is a wounded book.
The spine is partially off.
You can look at the conduct of life.
And there's something moving about this as, as I say, a sort of version of his own body surviving.
That the book survives but battered.
And it's battered because it was handed around in this hospital from homes to other people.
And so I end it with the beginning of the Civil War and a kind of wounded book from a wounded owner.
But anyway, that's some sense of the collection.
There is no collection like this in the country.
Nobody collects exclusively association items.
People collect, you know, a single author and associations around that author, but nobody collects the history of reading, as it were, or significant books from American libraries and only association copies.
And as uneffectually significant as these books are, they're printed books.
We're not talking about manuscripts here, and yet they do... Well, but that's a great question.
This has been a problem in the Library of Congress.
It was a problem here.
There's now a new category.
There used to be books and manuscripts.
Traditionally, there are two categories, books and manuscripts.
But these now occupy a kind of third category.
And that category has recently been called books with manuscript.
And that includes annotations or signatures or inscriptions.
And now libraries are beginning to catalog as AAS does, by provenance, by the owner, if there's a signature in it.
But they don't transcribe annotations.
So these books, you're right, exist in this sort of world between books and manuscripts.
But they have a context apart from the
Yes, the context is, and sometimes it's multiple.
This book I showed you from the Bradstreet Library has signatures, I'm sorry, I didn't show it to you, the book from John Cotton's library owned by the first American biographer.
It has signatures from almost every member of the Norton Library.
lineage from the 1650s through Andrews Norton, who was a famous theologian at Harvard in the 1820s, on to Charles Eliot Norton, the end of the 18th century, on to Norton's up until 1830.
In other words, almost every signature, there's a signature representing almost every generation from the 1650s to the 1930s, same family.
So, that book now is about that family, and it's kept because it has all these family signatures, and these multiple experiences of reading the same book, and reading the book your father read, reading a book your great-grandfather read.
So, let me get a little dry here, but... Listen, don't worry.
Yeah, okay, and... Well, what...
So I lead this kind of double life.
I'm a scholar.
I write books.
I'm a teacher.
Well, tell me about the teaching and how the books name some of the courses that you teach.
Well, I teach pretty much everything up to the Civil War.
My own interest is... No, I'm in the English department.
But I do really American studies.
This is really a kind of American Studies collection.
And the books I've written are mostly books about American culture during the American Revolution, the sort of emergence of American culture.
And when we're reading Jefferson, I have a book from Jefferson's library, we talk about that.
Here's a book from Washington's library.
It's actually...
A son?
To His Excellency General Washington.
I see.
Is this signed by Washington?
No, but there's a letter... Because if it is, it's worth a lot of money.
Well, I'll tell you what's fascinating about this.
I got this thing from Reese, and Reese had entered it as, there is no indication that Washington ever received this book.
So I go to the Washington papers that have been coming out for years and years,
Two years ago, there's a new volume that covers 1784, and there's a letter presenting the book to Washington and a long letter back from Washington acknowledging the book, which has a chapter on Washington and one of the earliest European maps of America.
This is America right after the revolution in 84, right after the...
And Washington says how complimented he was by it, that his French is poor, but he made his way through it.
But then what's really important is that this gift starts a relationship.
When Shays' Rebellion took place in the wake of the Constitution, America was getting bad press in England and France.
You know, this government may not last.
It's on shifting sands.
So Washington called this guy, who was a sort of professional writer, and he had been to America as a visitor, and that's what this book is about, his visit to America.
And he says, write something about how America is completely in control of itself.
So he became Washington's French PR man.
and wrote at Washington's urging a number of things.
And this is the book that began that relationship.
And contrary to Reese, who said it was never... And of course, the difference in value is enormous.
But how were you able to document this?
Because in the Washington papers, the printed papers Washington, they're up to like volume 28 or something, they reproduce the letter...
that accompanied this very book and the letter that Washington wrote back acknowledging the book.
So this is your research on the book?
This is my research, yeah.
Is this something you did here?
Yeah, I did here, yeah.
Name me the fellowship that you have.
Is it a fellowship?
No, it's not a fellowship.
It's a brand new thing.
Fellowships, from the AAS point of view, when you accept, say, NEH felons, you're accepting people who apply.
Right.
So the pool was limited to those who put in.
So they decided, we want to be able to choose a person.
Good idea.
So they got money from the Mellon Foundation to have an annual scholar-in-residence who would be called the Distinguished Mellon Scholar-in-Residence.
And I am the inaugural Distinguished Mellon Scholar-in-Residence.
Did they do a press release on that?
They did.
So I'm the first one.
So they had the pick of everybody.
And my position here is not just to write a book, but to sort of mentor younger colleagues.
So this is not like a sabbatical for you?
Well, no, I'm writing.
And I have some responsibility, but I'm off.
Just off the record, I mean, this doesn't get in the way of another sabbatical coming up pretty soon, I would hope.
No, no.
It's a fabulous honor, and I'll tell you why it was, for me, an especially fabulous honor.
The first one did not go to a historian.
You would think, given the A.S.
and the pool of historians out there, but the first one went to somebody who does English and American Studies.
And a collector.
And a collector, yeah.
And so, and in fact, you know, books are flown out.
David shared the books while they're here.
They're in their stacks.
I have to claw for my own books.
How many books have you raised here?
About 280.
Well, obviously the whole company, you're not going to try and get all 500 books.
Oh, no, no, no, no.
I'm writing about 100 books, or 140 books.
You're going to have an appendix of all the titles?
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, yeah.
That's exciting.
Yeah, it is exciting.
And I'm imagining it as a kind of art book.
All the inscriptions, all the annotations will be reproduced in a running right margin.
I'll publish now so I can use it.
Yeah.
Well, when it comes out, it's going to be, I think, a wonderful book for collectors.
want examples of signatures and learn about books and book ownership.
You have a nice opening essay about your collecting... Yeah, well, yeah, I would.
...what has driven this.
I want this to make a perfect place to break because I think we now have to talk about, you mentioned a few things on the phone about your youth and how you need that background stuff.
So I think I'm going to just...
A book called The American Gardener, one of the first American Gardener books, printed, and here he is.
He subscribed for five copies.
Is his name in it?
Yeah.
Oh, wow.
Thomas Jefferson.
He's a subscriber.
And this was published in Georgetown, right out of Washington.
And there is his little initial, T. The I and J in Latin, of course, are the same letter.
So there's no Js in these things.
So it's Thomas Jefferson.
And look what he does.
He writes his T not the way you or I would write a T.
He's trying to pun on the concept of a signature, a printed signature and his signature.
So it's half print.
He uses their J and his T, and then he uses their T and his J. But what's particularly interesting is look at the T. He used to write a script T. Then he concluded, a script T is too ostentatious.
I have to do a print T. Look at this T.
See the seraphs that come down from the top?
And you're playing a printed T. Yeah, a printed T. And actually it's the first letter in the text.
First letter in the text.
You see how the T replicates the printed T?
No one would make a top of the T that way.
I'd go like this.
Yeah, exactly.
But he's got the little descenders, the seraphs, on either side.
It's extraordinary.
So this is America's Premier Guardian's copy of the American Guardian.
This almanac was owned by a guy named Samuel Talbot, who was a Minuteman.
1776.
This is 1776.
Let's go to the cover again.
He uses this as a sort of diary, the way many people do.
This is his signature, Samuel Talbot, 1776.
And in February, he says he joined the circulating library.
But then, in July, he writes, independence declared, independence declared, fourth day.
So he puts it in the almanac.
Now, he probably didn't hear until the 8th by the time the word got up to Boston.
But this is a contemporary report at Bunker Hill.